Since 1998, NZ has used a Mixed Member Proportional (MMP) system. Under MMP, each voter has two votes: an electorate vote directed at the member of parliament (MP) the voter wishes him or her to be represented by, and a party vote directed at the political party which the voter wishes him or her to be represented by. There are no obligations for the voter to direct both his or her electorate and party vote towards the same party.

Two types of seats are present in parliament: an electorate seat (currently 71) and list seat (currently 49). The share of seats each party has in parliament depends on the percentage of party votes it receives. When an MP wins by electorate vote, he/she automatically gains a seat in parliament. The remaining seats untaken by electorate MPs are allocated to list MPs, who are not directly elected through a constituency. 

A party can be elected into parliament through two means: either one of its members wins an electorate seat, or the party receives more than 5% of the party vote. However, once a MP wins a seat, his or her party will no longer be bound by the 5% threshold. If that MP’s party received less than 5% of the vote, the party will still be allocated by the percentage of party vote it has received.

In order to form a government, a party must receive more than 50% of total seats. Since it is very difficult for a single party to obtain more than 50% of total seats, major parties often resort to either coalition with minor parties whereby the parties together form a government, or a confidence and supply agreements whereby one party agrees to support another party on certain issues, in order to form majorities. T

Most issues in parliament are determined by party votes, that is MPs from a political party would vote as a block entirely in favour or against an issue. However several exceptions exists. A split-party vote means that the party votes are distributed among “aye”, “abstention”, or “naye.”
MPs might “cross the floor” whereby he or she chooses to vote contrary to his or her party. When the speaker of the house deems a vote to be a conscience issue, a personal vote occurs whereby MPs vote as individuals, not as a party.
